The Pandas module provides
access to various
data analysis tools.
It can connect to and
interact with a database.
It can also read and
write Excel files.
After importing
the Pandas module,
we have access to a
useful read_excel method,
which can read an Excel
file into a DataFrame.
A DataFrame is a two-dimensional
labeled data structure.
You can think of it like a
spreadsheet or database table.
The Pandas module also provides
a useful Excel file class
with a parse method that can read
individual sheets
in an Excel file.
We'll use this for
loading our data.
Before we get started, confirm you've
downloaded the Yelp data file.
It includes information
about local businesses
in 13 cities in Pennsylvania and Nevada.
This was downloaded courtesy
of the Yelp dataset challenge.
In the data file, the Yelp data tab
contains the following data columns name,
which is the name of the business,
category_0,
which is the first user
assigned business category, and
category_1, which is the second
user assigned business category.
In our data, these are the top
two level business categories.
We also have take out, which is a true or
false flag,
indicating if a business provides takeout.
Review count,
which is the number of reviews.
And stars,
which is the overall star rating.
Then we have city_id,
which is the identifier referencing
the city of the business.
This could be matched to the id
column on the cities tab.
And state_id, which is the identifier
referencing the state of the business and
can be matched to the id
column on the state's tab.
On the cities tab,
we see the following two data columns,
the id column,
which is the unique identifier for
the city, and the city column,
which shows the name of the city.
On the state's tab,
we also see two data columns.
The id column is the unique identifier for
the state, and
the state column is the name of the state.
Let's load and read the Yelp data file,
import pandas and
use the ExcelFile class to load
the entire Yelp Excel file.
Then read the Yelp data sheet into
a DataFrame using the parse method.
We see that the type of DF is a DataFrame.
We can get a count of the rows and
get the size or
a count of the rows and
columns by accessing the shape attribute.
Get a count of the values in each column.
You can inspect the column headers by
accessing thee columns attribute and
get the type of data stored in each
column by accessing the dtypes attribute.
The described method provides
various summary statistics for
the numerical values in a DataFrame.
The head method displays
the first five rows of data.
If you provide an argument,
it will display the given number of rows.
This displays the first 100 rows of data.
You can drop the duplicates from
a DataFrame by using the drop
duplicates method.
By default, this will look at
all columns to identify and
drop duplicate rows in the data.
To select specific columns of data,
specify the names of the columns
inside of square brackets.
To select just the names of
the businesses, use the name attribute.
To query the location for the first
100 businesses, we'll create a list of
column names, then put that list
inside of square brackets and
get the first 100 records by calling
the head method with an argument of 100.
This will only show the ID for
each city and state but
we want to see the actual cities and
states.
So, how can we get the actual values?
We need to join this
data to other data sets.
We need to look up the values of each
city and state in the "cities" sheet and
"states" sheet.
Then combine them with the data
in the "yelp_data" sheet.
We do this by joining the data sets using
a common field or identifier in each.
This process of joining tables is similar
to what we do with tables
in a relational database.
The city_id in the "yelp_data" sheet
will join to the id in the "cities" tab.
And the state_id in the "yelp_data" sheet
will join to the id in the "states" tab.
The most common type of join
is called an inner join.
This combines DataFrames
based on a join key or
common identifier and
returns a new DataFrame that contains only
those rows where the value being
joined exists in BOTH tables.
In preparation for
joining our data,
let's go ahead and import
the pandas library and
load the Yelp data file,
the first thing I do is
import pandas as pd.
This imports the
pandas library and
allows me to reference
it using an alias pd.
Using pd, I call
Excel file and give it the name
of the Excel file
that I want to load.
In this case, it's yelp.xlsx.
That's an Excel file in
the same directory as my
Jupyter Notebook file.
Here's the Yelp Excel file.
That returns an object and I
store it in a variable xls.
Using that same xls,
I call the parse method,
which parses an
individual worksheet
inside of the Excel file.
In this case, I'm going to parse
Yelp data that will return
a DataFrame and I'll store
it in a variable df.
I can now import pandas,
load my data, and then view
the first five rows of
the Yelp data worksheet.
Df.head, run that and I can see
the first five rows of data
in the Yelp data worksheet.
To join to the cities data,
I'm going to first import
the cities worksheet
into its own DataFrame
using the parse method.
So xls.parse,
give it the name of the
worksheet in this case cities,
that will return a DataFrame.
I'm going to store
it in df_cities
equals xls.parse cities,
run that and I can view
the first five rows of
data in that worksheet.
Df_cities.head, run that.
I can see the data in
the cities worksheet,
I see the ID of the city and
then the name of the city
associated with each ID.
The pandas function for
performing joins is called merge.
Here's how it works, pd.merge
then I specify the DataFrames to
join in the left and
right arguments.
So on the left,
I'm going to use
the df DataFrame.
On the right, I'm going to
use the df_cities DataFrame,
those of the two
DataFrames that I'm going
to join or merge.
Then I specify how to join,
so how equals a string inner join
and then specify the join
keys in the two DataFrames.
So in the left
DataFrame, left_on,
I'm going to use
the city_id column,
and in the right DataFrame,
right_on, I'm going
to use the ID column.
Those are the two columns
that I'm going to match.
That will return a new DataFrame,
and I'm going to call that df.
So if I run that,
it should have merged my data.
Let's look at the first
five rows of data,
df.head and now I can see that
the city information has been
merged with the
original DataFrame df.
Here's the city on the right now.
Now let's merge to
the states data.
The first thing that we're
going to want to do is import
the states worksheet
into its own DataFrame.
I'm going to call xls.parse
and then give it the name of
the worksheet, in this case,
it's states that's going
to return a DataFrame,
will store that in df_states.
I can run that and I can see
the first five rows of that
worksheet df_states.head,
here's the ID for
each state and then the
name of the state or
the abbreviation for each
state associated with that ID.
To merge the states data,
we're going to use
the merge function,
so I'm going to call pd.merge.
The DataFrame on the
left will be df,
the DataFrame on
the right will be
df_states and then how
I'm I going to join them?
How equals inner, that's
a string and then the join
keys in both DataFrames.
So left_on will be
the state_id and then the
right_on will be the ID.
That's the name of
this column here.
It's called ID on the
states worksheet.
That's going to return
a new DataFrame.
Again, I'm going to call that df
and I'm going to run that.
Let's just get the shape of
that DataFrame df.shape.
That's just an attribute.
If I run that, I can
see that there's
now 600 rows and 12 columns.
So it added two new columns.
Let's get the first
five rows of data
again, df_head call that.
I can see that the
states information has
now been merged with
the original DataFrame.
Here's the state associated
with each state_id.
Now let's show the name, city,
and state for the
first 100 businesses.
So I'm going to create
a list of attributes,
A-T-T-S, we'll call atts,
and what are the list of
columns that I want to see?
I want to see the name column,
I want to see the city column,
and I also want to
see the state column.
Using those attributes in
my DataFrame and inside
of square brackets,
I'm going to provide that
list of column names,
and then from that
I'm going to view
the first 100 businesses.
Now we can see the
first 100 businesses,
just the name, and the city,
and the state associated
with those businesses.
This id_x column is
just a duplicate of
the city_id column.
This id_y column is
just a duplicate of
this state_id column.
So let's delete these
duplicate columns.
To do so, we're going
to use the del keyword
from the DataFrame
delete the id_x column.
Then del from the DataFrame,
let's delete the id_y column.
Now if we look at our data,
we no longer see those columns.
We just have the
city_id, the state_id.
Those are the original columns
in the Yelp data worksheet
and then the appended city and
state information that
we merged earlier.